The one degree war plan
Jorgen Randers
Norwegian School of Management BI, Oslo, Norway, and
Paul Gilding
Programme for Sustainability Leadership, University of Cambridge,
Sydney, Australia
Abstract
Purpose – The purpose of this paper is to present the idea of a global crisis plan that will be
demanded when global society ﬁnally decides that the climate challenge is a real threat, requiring
immediate and strong policy action at the super-national level. The authors believe that this demand
will arise before 2020, and the authors hope that this paper will encourage others to improve on the
plan.
Design/methodology/approach – The paper seeks to achieve the purpose by presenting the ﬁrst
draft of such a plan – “The one degree war plan” – in rather concrete terms, and estimating
(in quantitative terms) the expected reduction in climate gas emissions that would result from
implementing the crisis plan.
Findings – The paper ﬁnds that it is surprisingly simple to develop a plan which will reduce global
emissions by 50 per cent in ﬁve years. It also seems possible to lower global emissions to zero in the
ensuing decade, and then run negative emissions of 6 GtCO2e/year for the rest of the century (through
carbon capture in various forms). The result, using the C-ROADS climate model, is to keep the
temperature rise in 2100 below þ18C above the pre-industrial level. Much work needs to assure these
conclusions.
Practical implications – The authors argue that public awareness of the dangers associated with
climate change will increase over the next decade, to the level where it is perceived to be a signiﬁcant
threat to global economic and geopolitical stability. The public will then demand emergency action to
cut global climate gas emissions. The authors argue that such emergency action ought to be based on a
well-prepared crisis response plan that seeks to keep global warming below þ18C over pre-industrial
levels. The paper presents a draft of the crisis response plan and encourages further efforts to improve
the plan.
Social implications – The social value of having a well-considered and well-prepared climate crisis
plan in place once the public demand immediate climate action from their politicians, can hardly be
overestimated.
Originality/value – To the authors’ knowledge, no similar crisis plan has been published.
Keywords Environmental management, Global warming, Climatology
Paper type Research paper
Introduction
It is like belonging to a secret society. Conversations held in quiet places, in cafes, bars
and academic halls. Conversations held with furrowed brows and worried eyes.
Conversations that sometimes give you goose bumps and shivers, and a sense of the
surreal – is this conversation really happening?
This is what it is felt like over the past few years, to spend time with some of the world’s
leading thinkers and scientists on issues around climate change and sustainability.
In public, this group generally puts a positive, while still urgent interpretation of
their views. The general public position is: “we face serious risks, potentially catastrophic,The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available at
www.emeraldinsight.com/2041-2568.htm
JGR
1,1
170
Journal of Global Responsibility
Vol. 1 No. 1, 2010
pp. 170-188
qEmerald Group Publishing Limited
2041-2568
DOI 10.1108/20412561011039762if we don’t act urgently and strongly”. Of course, “If we don’t act” is the key qualiﬁer,
with very few prepared in public at least, to cross that dreaded line or to use those words
“it’s too late”.
But in private, often late at night, when we reﬂect on what we really think and
wonder if the battle is lost, it is a different conversation. The talk goes to the potential
for self-reinforcing runaway loops and for civilisation’s collapse. We discuss
geopolitical breakdown, mass starvation and what earth would be like with just a few
hundred million people. It is a very strange thing to calmly pontiﬁcate the realistic risk
of the collapse of civilisation and then go back to work!
Why are the public conversations so different from the private ones?
Changing public opinion and galvanising political and market action is an art rather
than a science, but an art made all the more complex by the array of human emotions that
discussions like this provoke. If the messages is too soft – the “win, win, we can do this,
let’s not dwell on doom and gloom” approach – people do not confront the scale of the
challenge and ﬁnd endless reasons for delay. When change is difﬁcult, or failure
frightening, then avoidance is a welcome escape.
However, if the message is too hard – the “we’re doomed, it’s a catastrophe, act now
or we’ll all die” approach – then people normally switch off, and move into denial, or
worse, into resistance.
The balance between these extremes has very much sat at the soft end in recent
decades. A combination of fear of generating resistance or backlash and a desire not
to be written off as too extreme (and at a personal level, not wanting to lose
motivation) has tended to drive experts away from the hard conversations, at least in
public.
This has recently become very challenging. The scientiﬁc evidence has become
overwhelming and with few exceptions has tilted all the uncertainties the wrong way.
The Arctic melting way ahead of all previous forecasts including worst-case scenarios,
the constantly increasing forecasts for sea level rise, the accelerating species loss, the
worsening droughts, the melting glaciers, the tragic ﬁres and so on, all take us to the
unavoidable conclusion – things are indeed, to use that delightfully understated
English term, rather grim.
We now ﬁnd ourselves at least once a week having a discussion with someone who
asks the question – “Is it too late?” which soon leads into “So what should we do now?”
This paper is our answer to those two questions.
1. It is not too late ... yet
Too late is not a single line to cross. Except in absolutely catastrophic collapse
scenarios, there is no “too late”, because action taken today will still reduce the level of
future damage and human suffering.
Our view is, however, that given the physical momentum for change already in the
climate system and the continuing lack of action on the scale and with the urgency
required, it is now too late to prevent major disruption and damage in the decades ahead,
as a result of inaction over the past several decades. We believe there will now be an
ecological and economic crisis, of a scale that is signiﬁcant in the history of human life on
earth.
But we certainly do not believe it is too late to prevent the collapse of the global
economy and civilisation.The one degree
war plan
171This is because our work, described in this paper, leads us to conclude humanity
can still prevent a process of runaway, self-reinforcing climate change and maintain a
level of global control – i.e. a decision-making framework and capacity to affect
actions at a signiﬁcant global scale. It will, however, require a level of mobilisation so
far beyond the current debate that it will seem incomprehensible to most readers. And
yet, such mobilisation is possible and could result in rapid and spectacular cuts in
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and eventually lead to a stable climate.
We ﬁrmly believe humanity can rise to the occasion, as evidenced by the
mobilisation for, and the results of, World War II (WWII).
The main point of this paper is to detail what the level of mobilisation and action
required to stop climate change could look like and to begin the process of reﬁning
such a plan.
2. Society will respond when it perceives a crisis
It is clear that society is capable of responding dramatically to major threats when
there is acceptance of a crisis. At that point, all previous arguments against action are
consigned to the dustbin. Modern history’s strongest example is WWII; others include
9/11 and the recent ﬁnancial crisis.
This is how it will be on climate change, but not yet. While the increasingly urgent
scientiﬁc warnings are causing rapid growth in the number of people who believe, as
we do, that we are already facing a civilisation-threatening crisis, it is not yet the
dominant view.
So, the evidence will continue to build and then at some point, there will be a “great
awakening” – a tipping point where, relatively suddenly, people will perceive the
situation as a real crisis. Perhaps, it will be triggered by an event unrelated to actual
climate change but symbolic, like a lack of volcanic activity creating three record warm
years in a row. Or perhaps, when the Arctic summer is ice-free for the ﬁrst time. Or, by
the current economic crisis bringing our economic growth model into question. Or, it
might just happen with no particular trigger.
Whether it occurs because of a climatic event, political leadership or just the great
mass of evidence is, while interesting, actually unimportant. Such a “great awakening”
will certainly occur. If not next month, at least before too many more years pass.
This is because the momentum for change that humans have now built into the
Earth’s climate system is like a fast moving, very heavy train. We are standing on
the train line, in heavy fog, oblivious to the approaching train. Either the fog will lift,
or the train will get so close we will feel its rumble. Then, we will jump.
Our judgement after decades of observation, recent interpretation of the high
quality science and various social indicators is that this point will occur before 2020.
When it occurs, we will shift into a “whatever it takes” approach to solving the
problem. Given the response will be “late” and climate change is driven by a series of
leading causes (i.e. it takes time – decades – before the full impact is felt), the “great
awakening” will generate demand for dramatic intervention.
At that time, the global community will – rapidly, though messily – develop a
global emergency response to cut climate emissions and pursue a safe climate
“whatever the cost”.
To succeed, this emergency response will require an extraordinary level of global
cooperation and unity of purpose, well beyond anything we have ever seen andJGR
1,1
172for which the only comparable, though still inadequate, example is the mobilisation of
many parts of the world during WWII. It will require a clear goal (a picture of
the enemy and of victory), rapid change, considerable dislocation and widespread
sacriﬁce.
Humanity will then enter a multi-decade response period that will see civilisation
teeter on the brink of collapse but most likely not fall over that cliff.
So, how will all this unfold?
3. The crisis will trigger a demand for a one degree war plan
The logic in any crisis is very simple. The question becomes: what action is necessary
to solve the problem? The mindset shifts dramatically and becomes, as articulated by
Winston Churchill in WWII:
It is no use saying, “We are doing our best.” You have got to succeed in doing what is
necessary.
To the objective observer, the climate science is very clear on what is “necessary”.
Allowing even 2 8C of warming (above pre-industrial temperatures) is too dangerous.
Although broadly accepted as an important goal by policy makers, no mainstream
science group actually argues this is a “safe” level. Rather, it is assumed to be “the best
we can do” based on the analysis of what is politically “realistic”. About 2 8will in
fact lead to widespread environmental, social and economic disruption and – most
importantly – pose a signiﬁcant risk of a runaway, unstoppable warming period that
could cause the collapse of civilisation. So, it is an inadequate goal. It is a plan for
failure.
The logical, science-based response is to set a target that gives society a “safe”
outcome. We believe, based on currently available science, that bringing global warming
back to below 1 8C from pre-industrial levels, can be considered reasonably “safe” for
humanity on a crowded planet. Staying below 1 8, in other words, is the solution to the
problem. It is “what is necessary”.
Therefore, society will, when the crisis hits and the scale of the threat is understood,
demand a plan to achieve no more than 1 8of warming.
As we have been writing this paper, a debate has begun on the right CO 2
concentration target and whether 350 ppm CO 2e is more appropriate than 450 ppm CO 2e,
which is the generally accepted target in the policy community. The former goal is
gaining increasing support among serious climate scientists, and is also the focus of an
emerging popular movement (see www.350.org). While we are generally more
supportive of a temperature target because this is the outcome needed, whereas the
concentration of GHG is the driver of that outcome, it is interesting to note that our
war plan delivers 350 ppm CO 2e. Accordingly, this plan could equally be considered a
“350 War Plan”
Whatever the technical detail and advocacy deﬁnitions are, our key conclusion is that
it is both logical and inevitable that society will at some point demand an effective
solution to what is clearly a major threat to the stability of human civilisation and the
global economy. We are therefore writing this paper to encourage people to plan for such
a one degree war sooner rather than later. The longer humanity works on it, the more
robust and effective such a plan will be. It will also have greater public and political
acceptance when it comes to implementation.The one degree
war plan
1734. A one degree war plan is realistic
The next question becomes: is a one degree war plan “realistic”? There are two parts to
this question:
Q1. Is it technically and economically possible to rapidly reduce global GHG
concentrations to a level that will bring warming back below 1 8?
Q2. Is an agreement to achieve such a plan politically conceivable?
The answer to the ﬁrst question is clearly yes. Our analysis indicates that based on
current knowledge and technology, a 1 8target is completely achievable at an acceptable
cost. This paper details an example of a plan that would achieve it. It would be very
disruptive to parts of the economy and to many people, and it would require considerable
sacriﬁce, but it certainly “solves the problem”.
It would require a level of mobilisation and global cooperation similar to that of a
world war, but society is capable of – and critically, experienced in – such mobilisations
when it ﬁnally decides to solve a problem. Therefore, the key issue is not the
technical/economic question of whether we can, but the political question of whether we
will ever decide to act.
Clearly, agreement to a one degree war plan is hard to imagine in today’s world.
However, in both WWII and the current ﬁnancial crisis, there are clear examples of
how fast things can change and how strong opposition and resistance can quickly
evaporate. In the case of WWII, the speed of response by the USA was quite
extraordinary. For example, whereas in 1940, defence spending was just 1.6 per cent of
the economy (measured as gross domestic product (GDP)), within three years it had
increased to 32 per cent, and by 1945 to 37 per cent. But the GDP increased itself by
75 per cent in that time, making the observed increases even more extraordinary.
The war effort demonstrated a tenfold increase in (inﬂation adjusted) dollars spent in
just the four years from 1941 to 1945 (http://eh.net/encyclopedia/article/tassava.WWII).
Similarly, extraordinary political decisions were made to take control of the economy.
For example, just four days after the bombing of Pearl Harbour, the auto industry was
ordered to cease production of civilian vehicles (Ferguson, 2005).
So it can be done, if we ever decide to act. But how will it be done? It is unlikely that
the one degree war will result from a universal global agreement. More likely, a small
number of powerful countries, a kind of “Coalition of the Cooling”, will decide to act
and then others will follow. Some will follow in order to align with the major powers,
and some under military, economic and diplomatic pressure. In a technical sense, this
process is quite easy. A full 50 per cent of global climate gas emissions will be covered
if three “countries” (China, the USA and EU-27) agree to act. If we add another four
countries (Russia, India, Japan and Brazil) the coalition will control 67 per cent of global
emissions[1].
So the issue is not humanity’s capacity to act, but the conditions being such that
humanity decides to act. This will be when it is broadly accepted that the threat posed
by not acting is greater than the threats posed by strongly acting.
Core to our argument therefore, is that the physical momentum for change in the
climate system is now so strong that it is inevitable the public view will change. This is
because physical reality will overcome the current and proposed attempts at
adaptation and mitigation, which are, relative to the problem, feeble and certain to
create little impact. When the dominant view becomes that climate change threatensJGR
1,1
174the viability of civilisation and the collapse of the global economy, a crisis response will
rapidly follow. Then society’s framework will change from “what is politically
possible” to Churchill’s “what is necessary”.
While we contend this transition is inevitable, the timing is certainly debatable. It is
our view that these conditions will emerge before 2020. For planning purposes, we are
assuming 2018.
5. The one degree war plan in overview
As stated earlier, our objective is a safe climate for humanity and that requires, on
current science, ultimate temperature increase limited to about 1 8C. This is the objective
of the one degree war plan and would be the outcome if this draft plan was
implemented[2].
In order to achieve this, humanity will need quick and dramatic reductions in
emissions of climate gases. Achieving these reductions is the core of our plan. However,
because of the long lag between emissions reduction and impact on temperature, these
reductions will need to be supplemented with actions that directly slow the rate of
temperature increase and we also propose these. Both these sets of measures will need
to be supplemented with adaptation measures intended to reduce the impact of
unavoidable migration and widespread hardship. Adaptation measures will be
important parts of a mature one degree war plan, but our early version focuses primarily
on effort to solve the underlying emissions problem.
It is a symptom of the magnitude of the task, that even with the dramatic action we
propose, our plan would see warming continuing to increase above 1 8until the middle
of this century, before falling back to þ18C by 2100.
We suggest ﬁghting the one degree war in three phases:
(1)Climate war (years 1-5) . Modelled on the action following the entry of the USA
into WWII, this would be the launch of a world war level of mobilisation to
achieve a global reduction of 50 per cent in climate gas emissions within ﬁve
years. This crisis response would shock the system into change, and get half of
the job done. We call it the “C-war” for brevity. This is detailed in Section 6
including a summary of the C- war’s emissions reductions and their distribution
among sectors.
(2)Climate neutrality (years 5-20). This would be a 15-year long push to lock in the
50 per cent emergency reductions, and move the world to net zero climate
emissions by year 20 (i.e. in 2038 if we start the C-war in 2018). This will be a
major global undertaking, requiring full utilization of all technological
opportunities, supported by behaviour and culture change. We call it the
“C-push”. This is detailed in Section 7.
(3)Climate recovery (years 20-100). This would be the long haul effort towards
global climate control – the effort to create a stable global climate and a
sustainable global economy. Achieving this will require a long period of negative
emissions to move the climate back towards the pre-industrial “normal”. For
instance, some refreezing of the Arctic icecap will require removing CO 2from the
atmosphere through geo-engineering actions, like burning plantation wood in
power stations and storing the emissions underground using carbon capture and
storage (CCS). Also, enough solar capacity will have to be introduced to powerThe one degree
war plan
175and heat the world without the use of fossil fuels. We believe humanity can
complete the job in the ﬁrst decades after 2100 or thereabout, and we name it the
“C-century”. This is detailed in Section 8.
The overall emission reductions proposed (including the suggested distribution among
sectors) are shown in Table I. The emissions pathway over time is shown in Figure 1.
We have tested our suggested emission cuts in a global climate model[3], and
conﬁrmed that implementation would deliver the following results:
.The CO 2e concentration falls below 350 ppm by the end of the century, after
peaking at around 440 ppm (Figure 2).
.Global temperature does temporarily rise above þ18C, in mid-century, but then
falls below þ18C around the end of this century (Figure 3).
.The average sea level rises by 0.5 metres around 2100, and continues rising to a
peak of 1.25 metres around 2300. While still very disruptive, we believe this is
manageable with good preparation given the longer time frames (Figure 4).
SourceEmissions in
2018Emissions after
C-war 2023Emissions after
C-push 2038Emissions after
C-century 2100
Energy supply 15 8 1 0
Transport 7 4 1 0
Buildings 4 1 0 0
Industry 11 6 0 0
Agriculture 8 4 21 23
Forestry 10 5 21 23
Waste 2 1 0 0
Sum emissions 56 28 0 26
Note: All items in billion tons of CO 2-equivalents per year (GtCO 2e/year)Table I.
Overview of one
degree war
Figure 1.
GHG emissions into the
atmosphere –
GtCO 2e/year2000160
140
120
100
80
60Billion tons of CO2e per year40
20
0
–20
2020 2040 2060
Source:  Siegel et al. (2009), using C-ROADS2080 2100BAU
One degree war planJGR
1,1
176The following Sections 6-8 provide more details for each phase of the plan.
We note that the science will continue to develop and that different targets for CO 2e
concentrations, temperature and sea-level rise may well become more appropriate as
humanity gets greater clarity on what is “safe” and what is “necessary”.
Therefore, even more radical action may become necessary if tipping points within
the earth’s climate systems require greater step changes to reverse them than those
anticipated in current state-of-the-art linear models.Figure 2.
GHG concentration in the
atmosphere – ppm CO 2e20001,400
1,120
840
560Parts per million of CO2e
280
2020 2040 2060
Source: Siegel et al. (2009), using C-ROADS 2080 2100BAU
One degree war plan
Figure 3.
Global temperature
change relative to
pre-industrial20005
34
2
1Degress centigrade
0
2020 2040 2060
Source:  Siegel et al. (2009), using C-ROADS 2080 2100BAUTemperature goal –1 degree C
One degree war planThe one degree
war plan
1776. Phase 1 – Climate war years 1-5
Overview
We propose a forceful start of the one degree war, for two reasons:
(1) There is disproportionate value in early actions[4]. Given society will be
starting action with the crisis in full swing, a forceful start will be necessary and
beneﬁcial.
(2) History indicates successful responses to crises tend to involve urgent, dramatic
actions rather than slower, steady ones. This engages the public and breaks the
tyranny of tradition. It can also be easier to get support for spectacular
decisions.
Our one degree war plan therefore proposes a series of global measures to achieve a
rapid halving of CO 2-emissions during the initial ﬁve-year C-war, through linear
reductions of 10 per cent per year.
Other authors, like Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) and
McKinsey & Co., have also described climate gas reduction strategies, aiming for deep
cuts by 2030 or 2050. These amount to reducing emissions by one-third and two-thirds
by 2030[5]. But in order for the world to stay below 1 8warming, more dramatic cuts are
necessary. The C-ROADS model indicates that it takes cuts of 50 per cent by 2023 to
reach our goal. This cut must be followed by reductions to zero net emissions by 2038
and net absorption of 6 GtCO 2e/year for the rest of the century. While the initial
50 per cent in ﬁve-years is very challenging, we will show it is do-able. Critically,
a slower start would make it very challenging to achieve the 1 8goal because of the
physical challenge of removing additional billions of tonnes of climate gases from the
atmosphere.
The good news is that cutting by 50 per cent by 2023 can be achieved with the types
of initiatives that McKinsey thinks will cost society less than e60/tCO 2e. The bad news
is that doing these cuts at our faster speed will, by conventional wisdom, increase the
cost. This is based on infrastructure having to be scrapped before the end of its usefulFigure 4.
Sea level rise
from year 200020001,000
750
500
250Millimeters
0
2020 2040 2060
Source:  Siegel et al. (2009), using C-ROADS 2080 2100BAUOne degree war planJGR
1,1
178life, and because technologies will have to be implemented before they are
commercially mature. If this is accurate, it is the unfortunate consequence of acting
late, as we are now, but delaying action longer will just make that worse.
There is a counter argument that we have not modelled but are inclined to support,
that a war like mobilisation of the global economy to transform our energy and
transport infrastructure will not only be affordable but also may in fact trigger so
much innovation and economic activity that it ends up being positive economically.
Either way, it has to occur so we will leave that judgement to history.
Our assessment indicates that the following actions, or others with equivalent
impact, would be required to ultimately bring global temperature increase below þ18C.
Our list is not a fully and comprehensively analysed plan, but a draft for discussion to
establish the approach as viable.
The climate war plan is divided into four sections.
1. Actions to reduce emissions
We propose the following actions to reduce global climate gas emissions by 50 per cent
during the ﬁve year long climate war:
.Cut deforestation and other logging by 50 per cent. Reduce by one half the
ongoing net forest removal and land clearing across the world, including tropical
deforestation. At the same time, concentrate commercial forestry operations into
plantations managed to maximise carbon uptake. This will require signiﬁcant
payments to developing countries, for the climate services provided by their
intact forests, but is surprisingly cost effective and doable (Prince’s Rainforests
Project, 2009).
.Close 1,000 dirty coal power plants within ﬁve years. Close down a sufﬁcient
number of the world’s dirtiest coal ﬁred power plants to cut the climate gas
emissions from power production by one-third. We estimate this implies closing
down 1,000 plants[6], resulting in a parallel reduction in power production of
one-sixth. (Power production would fall proportionally less than emissions,
because the dirtiest plants emit more CO 2per unit of energy).
.Ration electricity, get dressed for the war and rapidly drive efﬁciency. In response to
lower supply, launch an urgent efﬁciency campaign matched with power rationing.
Include a global campaign to change the temperature by 1-2 8C in all
temperature-controlled buildings (increase/decrease according to season). Make
this part of the “war effort” as a public engagement technique with large immediate
power savings. On the back of this, launch an urgent mass retroﬁt program
including insulating walls and ceilings, installing efﬁcient lighting and appliances,
solar hot water, and so on across both residential and commercial buildings.
.Retroﬁt 1,000 coal power plants with CCS. Build CO 2-capture and storage
capacity on 1,000 of the remaining power plants[6]. This huge investment would
be much simpler through international standardisation. The CCS technology will
also be needed for removal of CO 2from the atmosphere later in the one degree
war (generating power using biomass and sequestrating the CO 2). CCS is not yet
commercially viable, and will require heavy government intervention.
.Erect a wind turbine or solar plant in every town. Build in every town of
1,000 inhabitants or more at least one wind turbine. If there is no meaningfulThe one degree
war plan
179wind, build a solar thermal or solar power plant instead. Beyond the CO 2and
technology acceleration beneﬁts, this would have the powerful impact of giving
most people in the world a tangible, physical connection to the “war effort”.
.Create huge wind and solar farms in suitable deserts. Launch a massive
renewable energy program focused primarily on concentrated solar thermal,
solar photovoltaic device and wind power – on land and off shore. Given the
urgency, the initial focus will need to be on those areas with most short-term
potential for mass roll-out with ﬁnance supported by global agreement. The
Desertec initiative provides an interesting concept of what would be possible
with a multilateral focus (www.desertec.org). On a global scale, various studies
have shown how we could move to a 100 per cent renewable energy system
relatively rapidly. A recent global study showed how this could be achieved by
2030 with full base load coverage. Of particular interest is that it concluded it
would actually be cheaper than fossil fuels and nuclear power, due to the
efﬁciency inherent in an energy system based on renewable generation and
electricity use[7].
.Let no waste go to waste. Ensure that all used materials are recycled and reused,
at the very least to recover the embedded energy. To force this, limit production
of virgin aluminum, cement, iron, plastics and forest products – possibly
through international agreements to restrict their use through higher price or a
special global emissions tax on virgin materials. Drive public recycling as part of
the war effort (there are good examples here also from WWII where mass public
recycling drives focused on key materials).
.Ration use of dirty cars to cut transport emissions by 50 per cent. Launch
large-scale replacement of fossil fuel cars with chargeable electric vehicles –
running on climate neutral power – along with a massive boost in fuel efﬁciency
standards, bans on gas-guzzlers and greater use of hybrid cars. Public
repurchase and destruction of the most inefﬁcient vehicles (“cash for clunkers”
schemes) would help speed the transition. Given the time it will take to scale up
production there will need to be rationing of the purchase of fossil fuels and other
restrictions on their use such as special speed limits on fossil fuel cars. These
measures would in turn help drive the uptake of electric and efﬁcient vehicles.
In WWII, fuel in the USA was rationed at 4 gallons (per vehicle per week) then
reduced to 3 gallons, and ﬁnally in 1944 to 2 gallons. Alongside this, a national
35 mile per hour speed limit was imposed and anyone breaking the limit risked
losing their fuel and tire rations. The government ran marketing campaigns to
support these measures such as advertisements asking “Is this trip necessary”
and educations campaigns on “How to spend a weekend without a car”[8].
.Prepare for bio-power with CCS. Interestingly, the C-war may not see a large
increase in the use of biofuels for transport (not even second generation fuels
made from cellulose). It seems better for the climate to grow the cellulose and
burn it in power stations with CCS, thereby removing CO 2from the atmosphere
while making power and heat. For this reason, boosting cellulose production
(in plantations and elsewhere) will be key.
.Strand half of the world’s aircraft. Reduce airplane capacity by a linear 10 per cent
per year through regulatory intervention and pricing to achieve a 50 per centJGR
1,1
180reduction in airline emissions by the end of year 5. This will force the rapid
development of bio-fuels for aircraft and force a cultural shift to electronic
communication and away from frivolous air travel.
.Capture or burn methane. Put in place a global program to ensure that a
signiﬁcant proportion of the methane from agricultural production and landﬁlls
are either captured for energy purposes or at least burnt to reduce the warming
effect of that methane by a factor of 23.
.Move away from climate unfriendly protein. Move society towards a diet with
much less climate unfriendly red meat – through public education backed by
legislation and pricing. This should not be against particular meat, but against
the associated emissions, so that preference is given to protein produced with
lower emissions. There are large differences between protein types – emissions
differ from soy, chicken, pork and beef (and within beef, from grass vs grain fed).
Therefore, science-based policy should be made to encourage the most impactful
behaviour change. We note the US Government ran an effective “meat free
Tuesday” campaign during WWII.
.Bind 1 Gigatonne of CO 2in the soil. Develop and introduce agricultural methods
that reduce climate gas emissions from agriculture and maximise soil carbon.
This will require signiﬁcant changes in farm technology and farmer psychology,
and we are unlikely to get far during C-war. But the effort should be started
immediately in preparation for the large-scale binding of carbon in forestry and
agriculture which will be necessary from the 2030s in order to drive down the
CO2-concentration in the atmosphere during the rest of the century. In both cases,
the object will be to grow as much plant material as possible, and ensure that the
bound carbon ends in the soil or in subsurface storage, not back in the
atmosphere. Currently, global forests bind some 3 GtCO 2e/year. Hopefully –
through the use of fast growing tropical plantations, supplemented with
industrial growth of algae – one could achieve the binding (and safe storage) of
some 6 GtCO 2e/year from forestry and agriculture combined.
.Launch a government and community led “shop less, live more” campaign.
In order to free up ﬁnance, manufacturing capacity and resources for critical war
effort activities, a very large-scale campaign to reduce carbon-intensive
consumption, or at least stabilise it, would be of great help. This will align well
with the general need to shift the economy away from carbon-intensive
activities towards climate-friendly experiences. We would propose a bottom-up
and top-down campaign to highlight the quality of life beneﬁts of low-carbon
lives.
While all these actions may seem draconian or unrealistic by the standards of today’s
debate, they will seem far less so when society moves to a war footing and a focus on
“what is necessary”. Once more, WWII demonstrated that seemingly unachievable
actions quickly became normal when delivered in the context of a war effort. They
ranged across dramatic increases in the level of taxation, the direction by government
of manufacturing, and engagement campaigns to drive public behaviour shift. So, once
more, we assert that the challenge is not to ﬁnd appropriate actions, but to make the
decision to move on the problem.The one degree
war plan
1812. Actions to immediately slow temperature increase
Our one degree war plan will achieve signiﬁcant reductions within ﬁve years, but
won’t lower global temperatures until much later (after 2040, as per Figure 3). In order
to reduce the risk of triggering runaway positive feedbacks[9] in the meantime, we
propose an urgent initiative to lower the temperature immediately by temporary
means. While the science in this area is still under development, we conclude based on
current knowledge that the safest and fastest way to achieve this is by directly
increasing the reﬂectivity of the earth. Alas! it may prove necessary to do much more
risky geo-engineering – like introducing particles in the atmosphere to reduce the
incoming solar heat – if we want to have signiﬁcant effect. Or to invest in much more
expensive projects – like placing huge shades in space. We would rather avoid these, if
at all possible, but they should certainly also be further investigated:
.The white roofs campaign. What we do propose for implementation, because it is
very low risk, is a “white roofs campaign” to paint white (or cover with highly
reﬂective materials) most upward s loping surfaces in urban areas to
substantially increase the reﬂectivity of the planet. By reﬂecting back, some of
the incoming solar energy, one can compensate for the warming effect of part of
the CO 2in the atmosphere. The urban roofs campaign should be supplemented
with efforts to increase the reﬂectivity of other large areas: like brighter
agricultural crops or mirrors in the deserts[10]. Such actions to brighten the
world would not solve the climate problem, but could give society some more
time to get the one degree war up to speed and to understand tipping point risks.
The white roofs campaign would deliver a powerful signal. It has the great
beneﬁt of being easy to implement without negative impacts on the local
ecosystem, at least compared to other geo-engineering proposals such as creating
artiﬁcial smog in the atmosphere. It would also have excellent symbolic impact,
be capable of engaging people everywhere and create a large numbers of jobs.
The white roofs would have a limited, but lasting cooling effect (at least as long
as they stay white). But white roofs would do nothing to reduce the climate gas
concentration in the atmosphere, nor the increasing acidity of the ocean. All it
would do is to delay the temperature rise. Thus, the campaign should only be used
to compensate for the lateness of action, not to replace other actions. The white
roofs campaign would simply give us more time to win the one degree war[11].
3. Actions to organise and ﬁnance the war
The following actions address the most challenging area of climate change action:
global distribution of actions, costs and beneﬁts. Like in any war, this will inevitably
end up as a compromise between real power, equity and what can be achieved.
Our suggested framework consists of four key actions, described below: establishing
a multinational command structure, imposing a globally harmonised carbon tax,
establishing a system for distributing the funds and stopping pollution subsidies:
.Establish the climate war command . Create a “climate war command” controlled
by those countries participating in the war. Combine the expertise and the
lessons of institutions like the IMF (for professional advice on macroeconomics),
the IPCC (for advice on climate issues) and various multi-national military
commands. The climate war command would have a variety of powers including
the authority to ensure that funds are distributed according to a harmonisedJGR
1,1
182global strategy, and to impose equivalent tariffs on imports from any countries
that do not agree to the tax.
.Introduce a carbon tax of US$100 per tonne of CO 2.Impose a global tax on CO 2
levied at source on all fossil fuels (i.e. coal, oil and gas), Start at US$20/tonne in
year 1 and increasing by US$20/tonne per year over the ﬁve-year duration of the
C-war. This would initially raise some US$800 billion per annum, increasing to
US$1,900 billion per annum in year 5[12]. This would be around 1-3 per cent of
the GDP at the time, and actually less than the amounts put into stabilise the
global economy during the ﬁnance crisis in the Fall of 2008.
.Redistribute the proceeds of the carbon tax. The global carbon tax should be used
for two purposes: to fund the war effort (i.e. the development and implementation
of the various actions described above) and to alleviate the resulting hardship –
primarily among the poor (globally speaking).
The latter could be achieved through equal payments from the climate war
command to all global citizens of half the proceeds of the global tax. They would
start at US$45 per person year and increase to US$225 at the end of the C-war.
This compensation for the disproportionate hardship of the poor during the
one degree war could be supplemented by rationing systems to ensure each
global citizen receives a fair share of those goods and services that temporarily
will be in short supply – for example, food, power and fuel.
The remaining funds should be used as agreed by the war command to help
fund the development of new technology, to help pay for restructuring costs
including paying developing countries an annual fee for prevented deforestation
and to ﬁnance disaster response and adaptation costs.
.Shift subsidies from fossil energy to human employment. Phasing out over ﬁve
years all subsidies that support climate gas emissions, and use the proceeds to help
soften transitional unemployment problems. This will shift the subsidies from
carbon intensive sectors (fossil power and gasoline) to climate friendly sectors
(like renewable energy, CCS and battery logistics) – boosting their employment.
By some estimations, these subsidies amount to US$ 700 billion per year
globally[13] – more than enough to matter.
4. Actions to improve adapation
The accelerating deterioration of the ecosystem and the slow human response is
exacerbating what was already inadequate planning for adaptation to climate impacts.
This situation can be expected to worsen by 2018, so a mature one degree war plan will
need to address urgent adaptation needs.
The following three areas will be central:
(1)A resettlement plan for millions of climate refugees. Many of these refugees will
be internal, but many will need to cross international borders to ﬁnd suitable
homes. The wealthy countries will have to contribute substantially to
addressing this migration challenge if we are to avoid the worst geopolitical
threats that this will present.
(2)An adaptation strategy for low lying coastal areas. The sea level will rise during
the twenty-ﬁrst century and adaptation efforts will be required at the local and
national level. International cooperation will increase the effectiveness andThe one degree
war plan
183reduce the cost of such measures, for example, dikes, staged retreat, ﬂoating
cities and ﬂood resistant agriculture. This challenge is certainly not limited to
developing countries, the industrial world has signiﬁcant sea rise challenges,
for example, in Florida and The Netherlands.
(3)A mitigation strategy for large-scale famine. Climate change is very likely to
impact negatively on the world’s agriculture, particularly towards the middle of
the century. Disaster relief organisations and the military should make concrete
plans for such developments and their geopolitical implications.
Conclusions on the challenges of the C-war
Of course, the whole approach we outline is hard to imagine in the current context, but
again we remind readers how fast things changed in WWII and how quickly things
changed recently during the global ﬁnancial crisis.
Humanity is capable of extraordinary change when it decides to act. Nevertheless,
there will be some critical challenges to manage during this process, and these
challenges are worthy of considerable discussion as this plan is revised.
The main challenge, beyond agreeing to start the C-war, will be in softening the
problems for those hardest hit by expensive or unavailable energy, food, transport
and housing. As suggested above, this can best be addressed through a combination
of economic compensation and rationing. Our plan generates at year 5 around
$2,500 billion per annum to be used for compensation, structural adjustment in the
economy and adaptation planning. We also propose a well functioning rationing system
to ensure a ﬁxed minimum amount of these commodities for each global inhabitant.
While these are important, it should be noted that this plan is going to require sacriﬁce
and this cannot be avoided.
Against this, we have as our constant reference point the human suffering and
economic cost of the alternative of a rapidly collapsing global economy.
The second challenge would be to help those who lose their jobs in the transition.
This could be done by diverting current subsidies and using tax income, but also
would be helped by the signiﬁcant employment effect of the war-like production
increase in climate-friendly output and other actions such as expanding renewable
energy production and the white roofs campaign.
Third, and perhaps hardest to plan for, will be the great need for leadership. This
will be needed globally, but also at the national level and then further down in the
climate army to the local level.
Although not the focus of this plan, we see great potential for bottom up community
action and leadership in this overall effort. While we do not analyse this in detail here
because it is hard to quantify, we see enormous potential and note the efforts underway
all around the world such as the transition towns movement (Table II).
7. Phase 2 – Climate neutrality years 6-20
Phase 2 would be a 15-year continuing push to lock in the 50 per cent reductions
achieved during the C-war, making them permanent and launching the programs that
would see global CO 2e neutrality by year 20 (i.e. zero net global emissions by 2038).
The actions in Phase 2 would be inﬂuenced by the experience of the ﬁve-year C-war
and the scientiﬁc and technological developments of the time. In most cases, it wouldJGR
1,1
184be a matter of continuing these programs and expanding them, but in some cases new
initiatives would be taken. Examples of approaches might include:
.Create the global “Climate Stability Commission” to determine the CO 2
concentration required to stabilise the climate as the science develops, to
investigate and agree necessary geo-engineering projects to achieve stabilisation,
and to monitor their implementation. This review would include CCS with
biofuels and other approaches to remove CO 2from the atmosphere, reforestation,
soil carbon and soil char, the white roofs campaign, mirrors in the desert,
atmospheric seeding, reﬂectors in space and all other ideas.
.Rapidly rollout any geo-engineering projects with short-term beneﬁts – be they
reduction in temperature or removal of CO 2– after careful scrutiny of the
environmental impacts both in the short term and in the long run. Considering
the environmental risks probably leads to preference for increasing reﬂectivity
over atmospheric seeding.
.Eliminate all remaining net deforestation and promote the widespread use of
timber in ways which maintains its store of CO 2, like in buildings and other
long-lived products.
.Implement adaptation plans designed during the C-war including preparing for
migration, sea level rise, and famine.
.Regulatory action to close the loop on all consumer products and the diversion of
all waste from landﬁll to force greater recycling. This should include the
composting of all organic waste to immediately reduces waste volumes and
prevent longer term methane emissions from organic waste.SourceEmissions
2018Emissions
2023 Initiatives
Energy
supply15 8 Close the 1,000 most climate intensive power
plants. Introduce CCS on 1,000 of the remaining
plants. Large-scale expansion of wind and solar
energy
Transport 7 4 Rapid electriﬁcation of car ﬂeet, forced shift to
small cars and rationing of daily driving. Dramatic
reduction in air travel
Buildings 4 1 Dramatic increase in energy efﬁciency. Change
indoor temp 2 8C up or down depending on season
Industry 11 6 Shift to recycled metals and ﬁbre, limit production
of aluminium, cement, iron and forest products.
Shifting to renewable materials and increasing
energy efﬁciency
Agriculture 8 4 Shift away from red meat, increase the carbon
content of the soil
Forestry 10 5 Halving of all harvesting of wood
Waste 2 1 Capturing all methane from landﬁlls, and burning
all waste for energy
Sum 56 28
Note: In GtCO 2e per yearTable II.
Details of Phase 1 –
climate warThe one degree
war plan
185.Continue the massive renewable energy program to ﬁrst replace supply for the
dirty generators turned off in the C-war, and then to turn off the remaining dirty
coal generators by the end of year 10 and most gas generators by year 15[14].
.Continue the transport replacement program from the C-war so that all transport
is zero CO 2e by the end of year 20.
.Continue the energy efﬁciency program with incentives to reduce rationing of
supply to the most efﬁcient houses and buildings.
8. Phase 3 – Climate recovery years 21-100
For years 21-100, the challenge will be to rebuild the global economy based on
renewable (solar, wind, hydro, geo, etc.) energy in a sustainable model, to lock in the
reductions achieved, and to then stabilise the global climate by taking GHGs out of the
atmosphere. Actions might include:
.Launch those geo-engineering projects that were found acceptable by the Climate
Stability Commission’s investigations. This will involve removing CO 2e from the
atmosphere through a series of programs involving bio-sequestration and under
ground storage.
.Develop the global economy with a focus on sustainability, the elimination
of poverty and closed loop, zero waste and zero net CO 2e production and
consumption. Shift economic policy to a focus on quality of life vs material
growth for its own sake.
.Widespread application of approaches to help stabilise the climate, probably
primarily agricultural, forestry and soil carbon-related activities.
9. Conclusions and next steps
What this paper shows, at least at a high level, is basically good news, and writing it
lifted our spirits. It showed that even though we will inevitably respond to climate
change “late”, it will still be possible to stabilise the climate and human society.
Advocating urgent action remains crucial because the earlier we act, the safer we
will be, and the less disruptive the inevitable process of rapid change will be.
While hard to imagine today, this plan can be implemented relatively cheaply
compared to the costs of failure. Various analyses made since 2005 indicate the societal
cost of drastic emission cuts to stabilise around 450 and 550 ppm are about 1-2 per cent
of the gross world product. The costs will inevitably be higher when the one degree
war plan is implemented because of the speed required. But there is every reason to
believe that the war can be won with 5-10 per cent of annual GDP allocated to the task.
That would in turn translate into using roughly 5-10 per cent of the workforce, and
result in 5-10 per cent drop in average disposable income. It is not without sacriﬁce,
and certainly involves signiﬁcant dislocation for many people, but again not compared
to the alternative of a collapsing economy.
Over the ensuing period of restructuring, wealth levels would gradually move back
toward current levels, though distribution would be more even. Well being may increase
with stronger common purpose and sense of community, stronger global governance
and cooperation and many improvements in transport, urban design and energy.
While the total cost is manageable, the distribution of costs and the beneﬁts will
raise some very challenging political and social issues, as indicated by the actions weJGR
1,1
186have proposed in order to ﬁnance the one degree war and distribute the burden. This
would particularly apply to industries heavily affected and to developing countries,
particularly poor people within them.
Society has some experience of managing economic restructuring under emergency
conditions. Sometimes it is done well and sometimes badly. It is clear the better one
plans, the less painful the transition will be for those most affected. The problems
cannot be eliminated (again, war provides a good analogy), so it will be important for
both humanitarian reasons and the chances of success to prepare well.
Since it appears likely that humanity will not respond until the approaching damage
is perceived as a true crisis, society should get to work on the crisis response plan now.
Notes
1. World Resources Institute (2009), these percentages are based on 2005 emissions, excluding
land use, land use change and forestry.
2. As noted earlier, this also aligns well with those who argue for a 350-ppm target.
3. We ran our assumed emission scenario (along with an IPCC business as usual scenario)
through the C-ROADS model with the kind help of Siegel et al. (2009).
4. McKinsey & Co. (2009) shows how for every year of delay, the peak atmospheric
concentration of CO 2e could be expected to be 5 ppm higher for the same level of action. Stern
also argues the economic value case for “strong and early action” in the executive summary
of Stern (2006), executive summary.
5. Other cut strategies have been outlined, for example, in IPCC Fourth Assessment Report
(2007) and McKinsey & Co. (2009).
6. In this paper, we assume there will be some 6,000 major power plants in operation in 2018
(against some 5,000 today). We assume that 1,000 of these are closed down during the C-war
in 2018-2023 (reducing emissions by 5 GtCO 2e/year), and that a further 1,000 plants will be
retroﬁtted with CCS equipment (reducing emissions by a further 2 GtCO 2e by 2023). A big
CCS plant sequesters on average 2 MtCO 2/year – roughly 1 in a gas ﬁred utility, and roughly
3 in a coal ﬁred utility).
7. See Jacobson and Delucchi (2009), where a paper summarises their full study.
8. See Cardozier (1995), especially Chapter 10: The Home Front.
9. One of the key reasons scientists fear higher temperatures is that they may trigger runaway
climate change. This is so-called self-reinforcing or positive feedbacks. One such feedback
process is the loss of reﬂectivity caused by the loss of ice. Ice as a highly reﬂective surface
reﬂects radiation from the sun back into space, thereby reducing the amount of heat trapped
on earth. When sea-ice is replaced by dark blue water it absorbs more heat and creates
greater warming, which then melts more ice, potentially creating a self-reinforcing or
positive feedback.
10. See Lenton and Vaughan (2009). This paper compares the effectiveness of a large number of
techniques to counteract the warming effect of increased climate gas concentrations in the
atmosphere.
11. We have not included the impact of the white roofs campaign in Figures 1-4 because it is
unclear how effective it would be in quantitative terms.
12. Assuming that two-thirds of all emissions come from fossil sources (according to Table I,
this is 0.67*56¼38 GtCO 2e/year in 2018 and 0.67*28¼19GtCO 2e/year in 2023) and that the
tax goes from 20 US$/tCO 2e in 2018 to 100 US$/tCO 2e in 2023.The one degree
war plan
18713. Myers and Kent (1998) found US$145 billion in subsidies for fossil fuels and nuclear, with a
further US$558 billion for road transportation (i.e. petrol) subsidies.
14. We assume that by 2038 most power plants have been replaced by renewable energy, or
have been retroﬁtted with CCS.
References
Cardozier, V.R. (1995), The Mobilization of the United States in World War II: How the
Government, Military and Industry Prepared for War , McFarland, Jefferson, NC, 277 pp.
Ferguson, R.G. (2005), “One thousand planes a day: Ford, Grumman, General Motors and the
Arsenal of Democracy”, History and Technology , Vol. 21, p. 149, at 164.
IPCC Fourth Assessment Report (2007), Synthesis Report, Summary for Policy Makers , IPCC,
Geneva, p. 16.
Jacobson, M.Z. and Delucchi, M.A. (2009), “A path to sustainable energy by 2030”, Scientiﬁc
American Magazine , November, pp. 39, 42, 43.
Lenton, T.M. and Vaughan, N.E. (2009), “The radiative forcing potential of different climate
geoengineering options”, Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics , Vol. 9, pp. 5539-61, available
at: www.atmos-chem-phys.net/9/issue15.html
McKinsey & Co. (2009), Pathways to a Low-carbon Economy 2009, Summary of Findings ,
McKinsey, New York, NY, p. 11.
Myers, N. and Kent, J. (1998), Perverse Subsidies: Tax $s Undercutting Our Economics and
Environments Alike , International Institute for Sustainable Development, Winnipeg.
Prince’s Rainforests Project (2009), “An emergency package for tropical forests”, available at:
www.princeofwales.gov.uk/content/docu ments/Report%20-%20March%202009.pdf
(accessed March 2009).
Siegel, L., Fiddaman, T., Sawin, E., Jones, A. and Sterman, J. (2009), C-ROADS Simulator Reference
Guide , Ventana Systems, Harvard, MA, available at: www.climateinteractive.org
Stern, N. (2006), The Stern Review Report: The Economics of Climate Change , Her Majesty’s
Treasury, London, October.
World Resources Institute (2009), “Climate analysis indicators tool”, available at: http://cait.
wri.org/cait.php?page ¼yearly (accessed 11 May 2009).
Corresponding author
Jorgen Randers can be contacted at: jorgen.randers@bi.noJGR
1,1
188
To purchase reprints of this article please e-mail: reprints@emeraldinsight.com
Or visit our web site for further details: www.emeraldinsight.com/reprints